Stanislav, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
It's great to have you here.
It's good to be here.
Yeah, it's good to have you here.
I wonder what version we're going to end up
shipping of this episode.
We're going to talk about API versions.
API versions.
It's good to have many of them, you know?
Yeah, it's one of those problems that as soon as you
create an API and people start to use it,
they don't want to keep rewriting their code.
But you need to evolve your API over time
as it gets new features, as maybe more importantly,
you realize, oh, that was a bad choice.
How do you fix this?
So that's kind of the theme of this episode.
We're going to talk about concrete tools
that you can use to add versioning to various API
frameworks in Python and some of the ideas behind it.
So it's going to be a ton of fun.
Let's start, though, with your story.
Tell us a bit about yourself.
So previously, I have been a back-end engineer for six
or even seven years now.
But recently, I have shifted into infrastructure.
Right now, I'm a platform engineering tech
lead at Monite.
What I do is I make architectural decisions.
I mentor the teams.
I help the teams with Python-specific questions.
But mostly, I build Python-specific infrastructure.
And my main job is making our business teams happy.
Excellent.
I try to do that--
Sounds really--
Yeah.
I try to do that in my open source work as well.
I like to make my own open source projects.
I like to contribute to big projects, small projects.
It's all over the place.
And we're going to be mentioning one of them today.
Yeah, you built a really cool library
that we're going to talk about.
And that'll be a lot of fun.
It looks really useful.
And some other third-party ones as well.
So I wanted to ask you a little bit about,
what is the difference between being a back-end software
developer, which I think a lot of people
get the sense of, like building APIs,
building the back-end, at least, aspect of websites and so on,
versus, say, building infrastructure in Python?
What are these two worlds?
How are they the same?
How are they different?
So when you're building them, especially when you're
building products, it's very similar.
However, in back-end, there is already a lot
of infrastructure around you.
There is already a lot of people who
do portions of your job.
So there are people who can sell your product.
There are people who are thinking about how
to move it forward, how to evolve it.
There are people who are designing it, thinking about it.
But when you're a platform engineer,
you've got to do all of that yourself.
And also, one big portion of any library framework
or anything else, any developer tools development,
is the fact that, unlike an API--
well, a web API, a REST API, which
has a very strict interface where the developer wouldn't
be able to use it in a million ways,
a library, especially in a language
as introspectable as Python, the developers
can do crazy things with your stuff.
So you've got to think forward for all of these use cases.
And you've got to be sure that you don't expose
extra private interfaces.
Because once you do expose them, it
won't be nice to break them in the future.
>>Yeah, absolutely.
I guess it's a little more restricted with APIs
than it is with handing out packages, right?
Because people, they can just dive into the packages
and do whatever you want.
And the API is more or less limited
by what the website's willing to process, right?
Yep.
On the flip side, you have code on the internet.
And any time you have code on the internet,
that's always a little stressful, right?
Whatever is out there, it's incredible
if you have a website, you pull up the logs,
how much abuse your website is taking constantly.
>>True.
True.
But I mean, the great thing about building packages
is that you're not worried about what happens with them after.
You just give them.
And then if it breaks, it's not you.
It's not on your servers, hopefully.
But also, as I mentioned, you've got to both be its designer,
you've got to sell it, you've got to talk people through that,
you've got to document it.
As a platform engineer, you do all of the parts
that backend engineers are abstracted away from,
or at least in most bigger companies, abstracted away from.
>>Yeah.
Yeah, super interesting.
All right, let's talk about, I guess,
one more thing for your introduction before we move on.
You've worked on quite a few interesting projects here.
So maybe give us just a little bit of background
on some of your open source work.
>>So I'll just talk about, I guess, the most popular ones.
The coolest one was Pathwalk.
If you remember, in Python, there is OSwalk,
but then in Python 3.12, I added Pathwalk.
I have also added the type-ins for that into TypeShed,
I think some other things.
And I am, I think, top 10 contributor of Tortoise ORM,
the asynchronous ORM that claims to be the fastest,
or at least one of the fastest in Python.
And a few smaller projects,
which I don't think there is anything particularly
fun to talk about there.
It's just mostly bug fixes and small features.
But then my other projects,
the ones that I maintain, are way cooler.
For example, Pydantic Duality enables you to
have multiple versions of your Pydantic models
for almost free in terms of performance
and without any code generation.
And CADWIN, the project we're going to be discussing today,
implements, I guess, the fullest
and most sophisticated API versioning paradigm
there is at this point.
>>Excellent, yeah.
>>A lot of cool stuff.
>>Pydantic Duality looks, yeah,
Pydantic Duality looks really, really cool.
So a lot of neat stuff here.
A lot of different ways people might know about you.
So yeah, CADWIN's the one we're gonna be focusing on
for here.
So let's start with talking about APIs.
You talked about API-first companies, what's that?
>>So API-first company, just like any other term
that gets popular, is a buzzword, obviously.
But the truth behind it is,
an API-first company is any company whose main product
is an API and the SDKs associated with it.
And as a result, API-first company has to document
their API really thoroughly, think about their API,
both the internal one and the external one,
and take great care of that
because it's their main product.
So we have a lot of API-first companies right now,
but with every year, new industries are joining.
And if you ever heard of Open Banking, things like that,
banks are going to join us soon.
In some countries, they already have.
And Monite is doing similar things
and tries to bring that innovation, that Open Banking,
and that API-first approach into banking.
>>Yeah, so the company we work for, Monite,
they build, you all build APIs to basically facilitate
other people doing invoicing and bill pay in their apps.
Is that correct?
>>Yeah, you could call us a B2B2B company.
'Cause essentially, many banks, many marketplaces
are very outdated in terms of how they handle invoicing
and payments, and we try to take all of that,
combine that, and offer that as a white label product
to them.
So we do this for them, they integrate with us once,
and then they forget it was ever a problem.
They just give our product as their straight to their clients
>>Yeah, that's excellent.
So this seems like kind of in that category of API-first.
>>Oh, yes.
>>Yeah, okay.
Yeah, it's cool that you have concrete experience with it,
right, of course.
So give us some of the laws.
We coordinated a little bit beforehand,
and there's some interesting laws for designing good APIs.
Like one of them is the reverse Conway maneuver,
which to me sounds like a jujitsu sort of move
that you might try to pull.
What is this?
>>Oh, yes.
So when you are designing any system,
you gotta think about the way it's going to end up
and the laws that are going to govern them.
And Conway's law is one of the main laws that do that.
To explain that to people in simple terms,
if you have four teams designing a compiler,
you're going to have a four-pass compiler.
And essentially, the way you set up communications
within your company, the way you set up your teams,
your structure is going to be reflected in your product,
and you can't do anything about it.
You can spend money, you can coordinate people,
but at some point, Conway's law is going to affect you
and it's going to be harsh.
So one of the ways to, I guess, go around it
is to first think of an interface that you want to provide,
and it applies to anything, not just APIs.
API is just a really good example of that.
And then design your company
and the communications within your company,
the teams within your company,
to reflect the interfaces that you want to get in the end.
And that's reverse Conway's law.
- Okay, because your code and your APIs
and all those things are going to reflect
your company's structure and culture.
So instead of having that being implicit,
make it more explicit by saying,
well, this is the end point that we want,
the end result that we want.
How do we work that backwards to end up,
structuring teams or whatever to get this, right?
- Precisely, yes.
- Yeah, it is a little bit like Jujitsu.
Anyway. (laughs)
But there are more laws that do that.
Of course, there is REST,
which I guess not really laws, but principles,
which most people, or at least most companies I saw,
don't really like to follow it to the letter.
But if you do, making,
if you do follow REST,
if you try to make your API as available as you can
and as standardized as you can,
then it's much easier for new people,
especially junior developers to learn.
And then that makes it much easier
for your clients to integrate with you, which is great.
There is also, there are also a few,
I guess, more advanced things.
For example, when you are designing an API,
when you're doing microservices
and when you have many services talking to each other,
which in the end provide your final product
to your customers,
a good idea is to omit any internal APIs
and make all of your APIs,
or at least the majority of your APIs external.
That is also one of the things about API-first.
Once all of your APIs are external,
it means that your clients will be able to build a product
that is of similar quality to yours.
We're using your APIs, using your data,
which provides them with infinite capabilities of using you,
which is great.
- Yeah, that is great.
It's certainly frustrating when you see,
it's not on the API level,
but you see things in like the iOS platform
or in Windows or wherever, you're like,
why can't I do this?
Like, these are private things
that either Apple or Microsoft or whoever
are keeping to themselves
and clearly are important for building apps,
but you can't use them, right?
So you're suggesting that by having basically
whatever APIs you need,
I guess there's probably limits, right?
Like you don't want to expose, say, your like HR API
if you're not an HR company, right?
But in general, having your APIs just be all public, right?
It probably makes them better as well
because they just get so many more use cases.
They get treated with things like versioning
and stuff more seriously.
- Exactly.
- Yeah, yeah.
Excellent.
- But it's a complex topic that could span,
you know, we could discuss it for hours,
you know, which parts of your API do you make public?
Which parts of your API do you start versioning?
And if you're combining your APIs
using a gateway or a federation, you know,
it's a long story, but I guess with a federation,
you wouldn't really make it public.
- Sure.
Well, let's dive into that a little bit.
Let's talk about API versioning.
We know what versioning is in Python.
We have lock files.
We pin the version.
We might say we're using Pydantic 2.0.5
or whatever it is.
And that leaves the Pydantic team free
to do whatever they want.
And we can trust that our code
is gonna stay the way it stayed.
I guess API versioning is that,
but for web endpoints rather than software links.
- Yeah, and it's a little different though in some regards.
For example, when you're packaging your, I don't know,
software and you just send it to clients,
thing is you need to have versions for every single thing.
For example, if we are doing a bug fix
and we need to ship that to our clients,
that is going to be a separate version.
But in web, when you're hosting it on a server
and your clients just make requests to your servers,
you don't need that.
You don't need to ship bug fixes as separate versions.
You can just ship them
because they're not going to break anything for your clients
and your clients will be able to automatically get them.
Same goes for minor versions.
Minor versions that just add features
don't really need to be for a version on APIs.
That leaves us with just major versions,
which is why many companies like Stripe at Monite
use dates for their versions
because we don't really need
all of the power of semantic versioning.
- Yeah, yeah, sure.
More calendar versioning because all you really need to say
is this one is different than before, right?
It doesn't-- - Exactly.
- Stripe does a lot of interesting things.
We're gonna talk a little bit about what they're up to.
But you're right.
When I think about APIs that I've created,
sometimes I've had other versions, right?
One of the main areas is in the apps that we have,
over, is that the URL work?
It does.
In the apps for consuming the courses, right?
We had two completely different versions of the app.
One got completely rewrote it.
And many of the API endpoints were just fine.
We could just use them over,
and it didn't have to change anything,
but three or four were like,
you know, this really would be better if it was different.
And so added like a slash V2 or something in there, right?
But really, really limited.
So the thing that's interesting though
that you point out here is like,
until that happened, I'd shipped many, many versions
of that API, and long as the schema didn't change,
I didn't bother even specifying that it had a version, right?
It was just like slash course, my courses
or whatever it is, right?
Like just give those to me.
And long as it kept giving the courses back, it was good.
- Exactly.
And that's the thing.
As long as you extend stuff, it's going to be fine.
But as you mentioned in the beginning,
you can't really do that forever.
At some point you're going to make wrong design decisions.
At some point, even if you did everything perfectly,
your product is just going to evolve.
It's just going to evolve.
And then you'll need to use old endpoints that alter
or get old data and extend them in some breaking ways.
Of course, there are ways around it.
You can use API evolution.
You can just add fields constantly
and duplicate the old functionality.
But after a few such versions, your API will look terrible.
- Yeah.
- Which is why we use versioning.
And which is why when your company's main product is an API
when you are an API first company,
you can't do anything without versioning.
You can live for a short period of time.
For example, a pre-series A company,
I don't think should deal with versioning.
But then after series A, after you gather, I don't know,
15, 20 clients, it will be really hard
to survive without versioning.
- Yeah, and it's a really quick and easy way
to make loyal customers angry
by making changes to your API that just start breaking code.
I remember.
Yeah, go ahead.
- And even if you wait for your clients,
even if you warn them, it's still not nice
when you're trying to use some API
and then every three months or every month,
it breaks everything.
You don't do that. - Yeah, exactly.
- Even with a--
- You put in all the work to do the integration.
You got it working, you tested it.
Your job is, your product is not the integration.
The integration facilitates what you're trying to build.
And every time you gotta go back and rewrite that stuff,
it's not great.
I was working, I have MailChimp for our newsletter
marketing side of stuff, the courses,
and I've been using them for a long time.
And I got a message like,
hey, we're retiring this API you're using.
And their API is dreadful.
Like their Python library API is dreadful.
It's like star args, star star KW args.
You better pass the right things,
but there's no enforcement or instruction
about what goes in there, right?
And so some random dictionary that was going in there
was no longer right and had to be like recreated.
So they just decided,
we're gonna just take different stuff
and we're just gonna shut down that endpoint.
And when they did, all of the aspects of my website
just started breaking.
Like it wasn't crashing, but just anything around,
hey, put me on your newsletter.
Like, nope, you couldn't be on the newsletter.
'Cause people started sending me message,
Michael, I'm trying to sign up to be on the newsletter,
but it just keeps saying that something went wrong
with our site, we're sorry.
I'm like, oh boy, go look.
And they just turned off that endpoint.
And it was just like, nope, not doing that anymore.
And it was super frustrating.
It took me eight hours to rewrite it.
Because like I said, there was no real guidance on like,
oh, you just pass the dictionary.
Like, well, what goes in the dictionary?
You know, it was like some word of one of the keys chain.
I was so, it just took forever.
It was frustrating.
So what we're gonna talk about here
is a lot about how does that,
how do you not do, how do you not pull a MailChimp?
How do you set it up so that your code keeps running?
And you know, the reason why they did that is they're like,
well, we feel like we wrote it wrong before.
We wanna fix those to make it better,
but we don't wanna maintain two versions, right?
That's probably the heart of it.
It is until you have half a million users of the old API.
And how many of those, like, so for me,
yeah, I was frustrated.
Yeah, I'm like, all right, well,
I had plans today for constructive work,
I'm gonna go rewrite what I did four years ago,
and then I'll do something again tomorrow.
But okay, that's like a pretty good outcome.
A more common outcome is probably,
I hired a consultant to build me an app
and integrate MailChimp, and they're gone.
And now my thing that I built a year ago doesn't even work,
and I don't have the skills.
I gotta go hire somebody again
to dig back in there and fix it, right?
Like that would be really frustrating.
- Yeah, that's crazy.
And it could be devastating to some clients,
especially if the changes are huge,
especially if it's not just a single endpoint,
or if there is only one endpoint,
and it does a lot of things, then, oh my God, it's scary.
- It is, it is.
Before we move on to maybe some of the approaches,
Alexi out in the audience says,
"One more law, Hirem's law is also great.
"With sufficient number of users of an API,
"it does not matter what you promise in the contract.
"All observable behaviors of your system
"will be depended on by somebody."
- It is one of my favorite laws about any system.
- That's true. - Yeah, that is very true.
And it's a scary law, you know,
because at some point you'll have to version everything,
which is why it's a good idea to make things,
I guess, to describe all the behaviors
and to try to handle all of the possible behaviors thoroughly
so that you know what is going to become a part of it,
because at some point you'll just not be able to stop it,
and then you break something that was never intended to work
and then 100 of your users are like,
"Oh, we weren't using that.
"It wasn't a bug, it was a feature for us."
- Yeah, we needed that.
We found that's the only way we could use it, yeah, for sure.
All right, let's talk about some of the techniques.
You've put together a nice thing here,
like how to maintain hundreds of API versions and survive.
What are some of the ways in which people version APIs?
- So, first of all, it's really hard to really figure out
how people do this and how to do it,
because 90% of the time when you're going to be researching
API versioning, what you're going to see is people
having tough decisions between putting it into a header
or putting it into a path.
But then when you ask, "Well, how do you version?"
Nobody really has an answer.
Well, there are a few ways.
First of all, you can go from the lowest level
and version everything, including your database.
You just make a separate copy of your app,
you can host it on a separate server,
even a separate Kubernetes namespace,
and forget about it.
And you have two completely separate apps,
and now you need to have double the people
for the maintenance, or at least a smaller separate team
to maintain the second product.
This approach is really nice if you have a product
that cannot break.
There needs to be zero possibility of that breaking.
If you are on a nuclear power plant,
you'll probably do that.
You can't have the old one broken and the new one working.
But it's the most expensive approach, obviously.
You can, however, limit that.
You can start versioning just the application,
but not the database.
Okay, now we have the same thing,
a separate branch in our code, a separate,
not in our code, in our repository,
a separate Kubernetes namespace, whatever.
But now it's still expensive.
It's still a whole separate copy
of everything you have built,
and now you have to make sure that the new one
or the old one doesn't break the database
because the database might have changed,
but one of the versions of code might not know about that.
And then you realize that you go higher.
- Yeah, the database aspect of it sounds especially tricky,
especially a relational database
with super strong schemas.
Like, you know what, that used to be a VAR char,
and now it's an int, and so, nope.
It's just not gonna work, right?
There's really little flexibility.
So even if you run the two things in parallel,
then you almost have to have two databases,
and then like a mil points out,
and then you have to sync the databases,
and it's non-trivial.
- Oh, yes.
And then you start realizing, okay,
why do I need a separate branch and a separate namespace?
Let's just keep them within the same app,
because as long as you have separate paths for this,
even you can build separate swaggers from them,
you can have them within the same branch,
within the same repository, just in different directories,
and you can just copy all of your code.
And now I call that versioning by suffering
because you think, oh, I'm going to version less this time.
You know, now I'm not versioning the database.
Now it's not a separate branch.
It's gonna be much easier to, I don't know,
make fixes in both places.
But now you have to support both of the code bases.
And once you update anything,
any of the related resources,
for example, the database models,
you have to update them twice.
If you update any of the dependencies,
And that can get painful.
And after a while,
if you have more than two of these versions,
you're going to be asking yourself,
okay, what is the difference between these versions?
And if you weren't careful
with documentation and code review,
oh, you're in for a treat.
- Yeah.
- But that's just the beginning.
You can version much less.
Now, instead of the whole directories,
you can version just separate endpoints.
And I think that's the way that I recommend for everyone.
Everyone who is doing API versioning,
who wants to be with the cool kids,
I recommend this approach.
As long as you are a small company or an individual
and you want something really simple, that's a good way.
You just copy a single endpoint that you have changed,
create another schema for that,
and then create another branch in your business logic,
or maybe even no branch.
That's even better, using the same business logic.
But then at some point,
once you want to support many versions
or your versions become too different,
that's where you get a problem.
Because now all of a sudden you have all of these,
oh, I have this endpoint in this version,
that endpoint in that version.
Oh, it's gonna be bad.
- Yeah. - Really bad.
- Yeah, yeah.
We've been talking like there's the old version
and the new version, but in practice,
somebody starts to depend on the new version
and then you evolve the new version and it just,
it combinatorially explodes and it's out of control, yeah.
- Precisely.
So it's gonna be really bad for your developers.
Your clients are going to be fine with it.
Your developers are going to hate you,
although not as bad as with the previous approach.
Now, the next one you get to is you start thinking,
okay, what if instead of duplicating all of that stuff,
I am just going to change the schemas?
So, okay, if I do need to rename my endpoint,
I am going to duplicate it.
But most of the time you're not.
Most of the time you're just changing some field
in some schema, you're renaming it,
you're extending it, changing its type,
stuff like that.
That's like 90% of your use cases.
Okay, what if we just change the schemas
and then have some serializers?
For example, Django,
Django DRF loves that.
They love the serializers and reserializers
and you can just have a, each,
we have five versions and version one serializes
into version five, two serializes into version five,
yada, yada, yada.
And so our client sends us a request,
we reserialize it into the correct version,
then we return a response, we use the same business logic,
and then we serialize it back into each version.
Great, now we have solved all the problems
of the previous approaches.
Now, you need to realize that
when you're doing something like this,
you are in a little bit of danger
of creating bugs in the new versions
and these bugs cascading to the old versions,
which hopefully you have tests to handle that.
But at least your clients are happy
because you can support versions for a long time
and your developers are happy
because the burden of support is now on the serializers,
but you still have to support these serializers.
It's still a lot of stuff.
You still have to put every field in there
and take care of any problems that happen.
And each new version will change
basically all of your serializers.
A little bit, yes, but you won't be able
to support 20 versions like that.
It's going to be crazy.
And now that's where we get to the final approaches,
the approaches that I guess
the most sophisticated in the industry.
If you are making a backend for frontend,
for your own frontend, then you can just use GraphQL.
GraphQL basically requires no versioning,
and that's one of the benefits of it.
I would recommend that if you have developers
that are good with GraphQL, that's great.
You can omit versioning altogether.
But if you're not, if it's a public API,
then that's where Stripe's approach comes.
I think they were the first ones
to publish an article about that.
It was Brander Leach, the author of this article.
He has supported API versioning at Stripe for a while,
and he has helped us with building our backend.
API versioning approach.
Essentially what Stripe did is said,
okay, let's imagine that our developers
are only supporting one version, the latest one,
just like with serializers.
But instead of serializing every version to the latest one,
let's say that each version knows how to serialize
into the next version.
So let's say that-
- Kind of like database migrations.
- Exactly.
So let's say that I return response from the latest version.
This response, or at least they call them,
I think, version gates.
These version gates, the version gate for fifth version
knows how to convert back my response back
into the fourth version.
The version gate for the fourth version
knows how to convert it back into the third version.
And all of a sudden you get simple version gates
because if it's just field renaming in a single version,
then it's just a single line.
They're really simple.
But at the same time, they're immutable
because these version gates,
they're not describing the whole schema.
They're describing the difference between two versions.
And because we know that we don't wanna
change the old version,
we want the old version to work,
which is why the difference between version two
and version three is going to stay.
It's not going to change,
which is why these converters are also immutable,
which means that you don't need to spend much time
supporting them.
>>Right, once you get, if you're on version three
and you get the transition from one to two set,
like that's not gonna change ever, right?
>>Exactly, precisely.
Well, at some point you need it for optimizations
or for returning extra data,
but it's such a rare use case that I haven't seen it so far.
And I hope that I won't.
>>Yeah, so this is Stripe's approach.
And one of the things that's really interesting
that Stripe does and is laid out in this article
that you're pretty stable here is,
they also implicitly assign you a version
when you first make a call,
which was really interesting.
And I use Stripe and I didn't realize
that when I've made calls into Stripe
that the first time you make a call,
it pins you somewhere like on your user account
on their side, pins you to that version of the API.
And you never know you're on a different,
you're on a particular version,
but they keep you on that version.
That's wild.
>>That's great.
Imagine you log in into Stripe, you make a call,
and then every time you open a documentation
in your account, you're going to see your version.
Every time you make a call,
you're going to get response from your version.
And then because they keep versions for years,
for example, we are using, I think,
three or four year old version of Stripe's API,
and they still keep it.
According to this article, they keep all of their versions,
all since the company's beginning.
I'm not sure how old that is.
Yeah, but still, they keep years worth of versions.
That is very true.
>>Now, you might see that as a negative.
Like you might think, well, I'm pinned to this version.
Like how do I escape the old version
if I want the new version?
But you can pass it in a header,
or there's other ways to say,
I explicitly choose something else.
But by default, you're just, you're living in the past.
>>Yeah, and that's really cool.
You integrate, and then you live in the past
for as long as you want.
The thing is, yes, you can change it using a header.
Monite has a similar structure.
You can also change it in your partner's portal,
and you can also, or I guess developer's portal,
and you can also specify, for example,
if you receive webhooks from Stripe,
you can specify, okay, I want this webhook of this version
and that webhook of that version.
>>That's cool.
>>And it's a really neat interface
that if you don't want to think about versioning,
you don't, you forget about it.
But the second you want to,
the second you want to have the latest API,
they give you all the tools to work with it nicely.
And that's the thing.
This approach allows you to keep years worth of versions,
or maybe even decades worth of versions, actually,
without your developers getting overburdened,
because there is still a single version
of the business logic.
They work on a single version of Schemas,
and they just need to make sure
that when they release a new version,
they write a converter for it.
And your clients are also happy
because they never need to switch.
>>Yeah, it sounds really nice.
I suspect there's not a complete ability
to just ignore the old versions,
because maybe you want, in your new version,
you're going to imagine this piece of data
doesn't even exist,
and we're going to remove it from the database.
But if it needs to be there for the old ones,
there's probably some level of,
you're constrained a little bit,
but it sounds a lot better still.
>>Yeah, you're still constrained,
but remember, API versioning, if we translate it,
application programming interface versioning,
we're not versioning the app,
we're versioning the interface to the app.
>>Yeah, so a lot of times it's like,
what fields are we passing or something, right?
Yeah.
>>Yeah, so if you are trying to change the data
between versions, if the data is different,
entirely different, I mean,
then you're probably not doing API versioning.
Then you probably should be calling it
application versioning.
And actually, Stripe has, I guess, a hack for that too.
If you take a look at their API, they still have a V1,
but that's the thing, they don't use this V1.
They use date-based versioning that is in the headers
and their settings.
But the V1 is precisely for this situation.
If someday they will need to have something else,
if someday they will need to break everything
and change the data required or any other crazy changes,
they will be able to do it using that V1.
>>Yeah, yeah, it's just there in case, exactly.
>>Yep.
So yeah.
>>Cool, all right, well, let's talk about your project.
Let's talk about your project
that makes this possible in Python,
because the Stripe examples,
I believe this is Ruby that they all have here, right?
Which--
>>It is.
It is really nice to read until you try to understand it,
until you try to understand what it actually does.
And it's crazy.
>>I know, when I was reading this today, I was like,
you know, I'm pretty glad
that I'm not writing Ruby right now.
Okay, all right, let's talk about Python though.
You've got a project called CAD1
that takes the Stripe philosophy
and applies it to versioning
for the most popular API framework for Python, FastAPI.
>>FastAPI.
Tell us about it.
>>Yeah, so here's the thing.
When I started developing it,
we were using versioning by suffering.
So we were using directory copies,
and none of us really enjoyed it,
so there needed to be a solution.
And I went to Stripe, I went to other companies,
I spoke with them,
I tried to understand the nitty-gritty details.
As I mentioned, Brander Leach extended us huge help
when he, I guess, described how he thinks
about API versioning right now.
And I built it.
The first version was just like Stripe.
It was exactly what Stripe did, you know, to the letter.
But then at some point,
we started applying it at Monite,
and I realized, wow, Stripe had a lot of legacy.
So they didn't implement some things.
For example, in Stripe's article,
you can see that they're not using any schema validation,
or at least, how do I describe it?
Their business logic just receives a hash map, a dictionary.
It's not statically typed.
But FastAPI uses Pydantic,
so it's a bit more complex than that.
Okay, we added support for that.
It's a bit more complex.
It's a bit more, I guess, sophisticated now.
But then I also realized that Stripe,
they don't migrate requests.
They only migrate responses.
Because a migration of a request
is usually not just a breaking change,
it's a change in a business logic.
Because when you return a response,
you can just return the whole thing,
and then, you know, just play around with it.
But when you are changing the request,
your business logic also needs to change.
And that's what they did.
You know, they have extra ifs and extra, you know,
levels of business logic to handle that.
Well, apparently, it's not necessary.
Apparently, requests are also migratable.
And that's the second feature
that greatly distinguishes us from Stripe.
This thing can statically, well, by statically,
I mean, it co-generates your schema
so that you can see everything
before you run your app.
This thing can migrate both requests and responses,
and it supports everything that Stripe does.
And we have pretty big plans for extending it.
And as an added bonus,
we also have a pretty big documentation.
Well, not compared to Django or FastAPI.
Django is, you know, older than me,
and FastAPI is really amazing for,
how do I describe it?
It's pretty amazing in terms of its documentation.
Sebastian Ramirez is an expert at making tutorials.
And if you take a look at our reference documentation
to the left and our, how do I describe it?
Recipes documentation,
they basically describe to you every single use case
that you could have with API versioning.
Every single, you know,
every single problem that you could solve with it.
And then we try to apply our approach to it.
So it's not just the framework.
It's all the ways you could use the framework.
Someday, hopefully we will also extend it
beyond FastAPI and Pydantic.
And we also have sections for theory,
for people who are not Pythonistas,
who just wanna learn how to do API versioning,
but failed to find any resources.
So Kadwin also becomes this, I guess,
hub for API versioning resources
and anything related to them.
- Sure.
It seems like it would probably be pretty easy
to adapt to anything that uses Pydantic
for its data exchange.
- Oh, yes.
- Yeah.
So like, for example, in Flask,
Flask doesn't do the model binding type stuff
on the endpoint,
but you can just take the input data
and just star star it into a Pydantic model.
And then, you know, now you're in Pydantic world, right?
So it sounds like maybe something along those lines
might be a good bridge.
- Oh, yes, it can be.
Though there's a lot of magic involved
in trying to interface with FastAPI
simply due to its internal complexity.
- Sure.
- But yeah.
- All right, so some good questions,
but I think they'll be somewhat answered
if we just maybe talk us through your tutorial here.
Like, what is it?
How do we use Kadwin and how does it manifest?
How does it work at runtime?
Stuff like that.
- So first, before using Kadwin,
you know, you write your regular app,
but then you just structure it a little bit differently.
When you are versioning,
you need a directory that you will consider versioned.
So, and this directory will be duplicated for every version.
No worries, you're not going to support the version code.
It's going to be code generation all the way through.
And you can use it to generate connectors
for your application,
or you could use it to generate schemas or enums,
you know, the different version of them
and anything else related to them.
So you pick such a directory,
you call it latest as for your latest version.
Then you define a single version bundle.
If you go a little bit down,
you will see somewhere in here after defining versions.
Yes, we define our version bundle with a single version,
whichever version it is for you,
whichever date it is for you.
And then you run code generation.
It generates basically empty, how do I describe it?
It generates a directory
that simply imports from your latest,
and that's where you can start doing the magic.
Now you just use our versioned app.
If you take a look, we have a versioned API router,
then you use the Katherine versioned app,
you generate versioned,
versioned, versioned, versioned.
You generate versioned routers,
and then it's going to generate
a really nice swagger for them.
If you open it somewhere, I think, yep, this one.
So now your dashboard, the one on docs,
is not the swagger page,
but the dashboard of all your versions.
And that's it.
After that, you can simply repeat the steps above.
So you write a migration, write that converter
that describes the difference between the versions.
We have it somewhere there.
Let's see, yep.
For example, if we had an address as a string
and we want to change it to a list,
we say, okay, schema, base user.
- So for people listening, you have a user object,
which is a Pydantic model.
The user object in the initial version
just had a field called address, which was a string.
But you said, you know what?
People might have multiple addresses that they live at,
so let's make it a list of strings
and make it address as, right?
Which seems like a minor change,
but clearly that's going to be a major problem
for the things that assume there's an address
and it's no longer there, right?
So you create this version change derived class
that has a upgrade, downgrade basically feature, right?
- Yep, and so you just describe,
you simply describe how to migrate your,
how do I, you simply describe
how do you migrate your schemas?
How do you change your schema classes,
your Pydantic models?
And then you describe how you convert
your requests and response, and that's it.
This class is the only thing you write for the new versions.
Then you run code generation, run your app, that's it.
Everything works.
- Yeah, that's super cool.
So couple of questions that were,
or comments that are interesting here is,
Emil asks, is it like database migrations?
And my friend points out, - It's really similar.
- It's really, really similar to like Alembic, right?
You say, generate me the changes.
Alembic is a little different in that it looks
at the two different database schemas
and tries to actually write the migration code
to do the DDL changes.
But in principle, it's like every time
there's a version change, there's some bit of code
that is generated that will run.
And then the other one is about,
how does this affect performance?
And I guess the only real performance change
is like there'll be a couple of steps to the serialization,
but they're often small.
Like in this case, the new version takes the old data
and says, well, we're just gonna have a list
with one address, so we're gonna stick the one address
into the list of addresses, and vice versa.
You just set the address field to be the first thing
in the address list.
And like, that's a really low amount of code overhead
to go back.
Hopefully people are moving towards the new versions
eventually, that kind of thing.
But if they don't, then this code just runs
to transform the dictionaries that goes back to it.
- Yeah, but thing is, imagine you have like Stripe,
I don't know, 13 years worth of versions.
Now, if you are a successful company,
and if you are alive, you are probably a successful company
after 13 years.
If you're a successful company, that most of your clients
will probably be newer ones.
You know, the longer you exist,
the more clients you have, and the more clients you have,
the more, you know, newer clients you have,
the newer API versions they will use.
And this means that most of your clients-
- They might decide to, they might rewrite their own app
and get a new version, right?
Like they could upgrade their code,
'cause their code's gonna be 13 years old
or 12 years old at this point.
They're like, they need to change too.
- And so at some point, yes, your old client might,
you know, from the very first version might request something
and then we'll go through all converters.
Well, not all, all converters that are related
to the specific request and response.
And that is probably going to be in the tens,
not even in the hundreds, even after 13 years.
But your clients from the latest versions
or even from the middle versions will not suffer that.
So the majority of your clients
will actually see almost no performance difference.
And even your old clients,
even your clients for 13 years old will probably,
even if they do see a performance difference,
it's not going to be multiple orders.
It's not going to be 2X, 3X,
it's probably going to be maybe 20%,
maybe even 10%, depending on how slow your app is.
And that's considering how many years have passed
is crazy fast.
- Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
That's very cool.
So what about the URL?
What about the endpoint?
Do, how much do consumers of your API
have to actually think about,
I'm using this version or that version?
Is it passed as a, is the version passed as a header,
it's a query string, part of the URL?
- The version is passed as a header.
And Cadwin on by default requires it to be.
But if you have some developer portal,
if you wanna store your version in some database,
then even though it's a little more advanced,
you can write yourself your own middleware
that will check if the client already has a version
and then pick that version and put it into the context bar.
And it's possible.
So by default, you're going to have,
no, no, no, middlewares are the more advanced sections,
not in the tutorial.
- This one has an, this other one
we're gonna talk about in a section,
has just an example of all,
you basically just in fastAPI, when you create the app,
like app equals fastAPI,
you just say middleware equals a list of classes
that implement these behaviors.
So what you're suggesting is,
like you just create a class
and you pass it in at fastAPI startup.
And it just goes, is there a version being passed to me?
If not, let's see who the user is based on their API key,
pull that from a database
and maybe just set that header right there
before the request and then let it fly, right?
Something like that?
- Yep, and then your API will essentially be Stripe-like
where your client won't need to
think about versioning at all.
But by default, of course,
the clients need to always pass it with a header,
which might sound like something really,
unnecessary and hard for the clients.
But if you imagine that you're writing code,
it's exceptionally easy to just put it into your,
I don't know, requests or HTTPS client
and forget about it.
- Yeah, it is pretty easy.
If you're consuming APIs
in the fashion that we're talking about,
you're probably already putting an API key
or some kind of thing into the header as well, right?
So you're already messing with the header anyway,
just put another value in there.
- Yep, precisely.
- Yeah, very cool.
All right, so right now this is a FastAPI thing,
but you're considering opening it up to other areas,
other platforms, other frameworks?
- It has a, what is it called?
Milestone for that,
which I am planning to extend with tasks, with plans.
First, it's like with Pydantic,
at some point it separated the core
when it was moving to Pydantic 2,
and that's one of the plans for Kadwin.
Separate the core without breaking the public interfaces.
And then at some point use this core to build more Kadwins,
Kadwin Django, Kadwin Flask, whatever.
Or it doesn't even have to be a part of Kadwin.
The approach is there, so anyone can use it.
Because 99% of complexity in implementing Kadwin
was actually figuring out these patterns
and understanding how to do it.
Because unlike a web app, unlike, I don't know,
many apps that we develop daily,
these things haven't been done.
People have migrated stuff, but it was mostly,
oh, change this dictionary without a proper DSL
or without code generation, without the niceties
that would make your IDs happy
and that would make autocompletion happy.
- Yeah, oh.
Yeah, you are a contributor to TypeShed, which is awesome.
- Oh, yes.
- So you must care about conveying
the type information of the different versions
and stuff like that.
That's tricky, right?
And of course, working on FastAPI and Pydantic,
those are very type.
Oh, and the shirt says Type Hints for Life, I love it.
I don't have any cool slogan on mine,
I just have gray stripes.
But I should, very cool.
So yeah, wanna speak to the type hint,
type information aspect of this whole thing?
- Well, essentially, as I mentioned,
Stripe did it using simply dictionaries
and it was mostly untyped, as probably many people know.
Stripe, after having so many problems with scalability
in terms of the team scalability and problems with typing,
they have decided to adopt Sorbet,
well, not adopt, create Sorbet,
which is essentially a type checker.
It's like a type checker and DSL for Ruby for type hints,
which is really nice.
It has both a runtime component and a static component,
as far as I remember.
But they still, most of the time, work with untyped code,
which essentially can lead to many errors.
Kadwin tries to make sure
that you still work with your schemas,
you still know which schema you work with,
it's always the latest.
And Kadwin tries to make sure
that you're not going to have any type errors
if you don't want to.
And you're going to have all of the niceties
of having this dynamic
request response conversion thing.
So we're trying to take the best of both worlds,
have you support very little code,
but make sure that you can type hint everything
without any issue and you're not going to have problems
and your type checker is going to check everything for you.
And your, I don't know, VS Code is going to see
which fields something has, which types of things.
- Yeah, excellent.
One of the big problems with all the runtime modifications,
one way you could have done this is that app startup,
it could look at all of those things
and it could just dynamically generate
all the different versions and all the things
using meta programming, but then the editor--
- Yeah, and it does that.
Yeah, it does that with the endpoints
because endpoints are not, you know,
your editors, they don't care about endpoints.
- Exactly.
- You never call your endpoint from your code.
No, you usually call the business logic from it,
which is why I decided to do it in runtime.
You don't really need it.
But for Schemas, yes.
For Schemas, having them generated
and then having people guessing
and then having their IDs just put everything in red,
that is horrible.
I wouldn't want anyone to have that.
- Yeah, yeah, I don't like it either.
Not at all.
It's right up there with the star, star, star, KW args.
Have a good time guessing in my world.
I don't like either of them.
Awesome, all right.
Well, let's just maybe touch real quickly
on a couple of other choices that are out here.
You know, Kadwin looks awesome, but we also have,
for example, we have from Dean Way,
we have FastAPI versioning,
which has a very different philosophy.
It has kind of the V1, the V2 style
that you might maintain multiple versions of.
You wanna just maybe speak to your thoughts
on this one real quick and people can take that
if they like this style.
- It's a great library.
And I think it's either the first or the most popular.
It's definitely the most popular,
but I think it might even be the first library
in FastAPI to implement versioning,
implement proper versioning.
It has a few issues.
First of all, it only, as far as I remember,
it is mostly, how do I say it?
It is mostly duplication-based,
so it doesn't automate anything for you,
which is a good thing if you know what you're doing
and you're not going to have a lot of versions.
But if you have 10 or 20 versions,
if you wanna keep them for a long time,
this is the endpoint copying approach that I mentioned,
that with time is going to kill you,
which is a problem here.
The second problem is that it, as far as I understand,
kind of recommends semantic versioning,
though it doesn't bind you to it.
You can use dates,
though you will have to make sure that they're dates yourself
and you can use just simple integers.
So you're not bound by semantic versioning,
but it has a few examples with that.
Aside from these two, it's an amazing library.
And for anyone who just wants to version a small app,
just add a single version that is going to be,
the old version is going to be deleted in like two months,
use that, use FastAPI versioning.
It's an amazing library and you don't need anything else.
CADWIN is for use cases where you need to keep
a larger number of versions,
or if the changes between your versions are much trickier.
- Sure, yeah, like this might be pretty good
for my example I talked about with the courses app
that we built, right?
We literally have two versions.
It's been around since 2018 and there's two versions.
You know, like that would be a decorator
and I'm probably good to go.
I don't need to think too much about it.
- Precisely, no code generation, no nothing.
You just put it in and you go.
- Yep, all right, another one.
If you're a Flask person, you could have Flask rebar,
which seems to have a real similar philosophy
to what you just described, but you know, it works for Flask.
- Oh, I feel like it's a little more complex than that.
If I remember on us discussing that, let me pull that up.
- Oh yes, no, it is also the parent point.
So it also allows you to duplicate single endpoints
and it also allows you to, how do I describe it?
It also allows you to do arbitrary prefixes.
So you can have integers, you can have dates,
you can have, you know, whatever.
- Old, new, whatever.
- Yeah, old, new.
I guess some people do that.
(laughing)
- Yeah, latest, latest.
- Yeah, yeah, latest, latest, final, yes, exactly.
- But yeah, it's really similar.
- They probably use zipping up folders
for version control as well.
I'm just naming them by the date, final, final, final.
- Yeah, let's not use Git, let's just copy them.
And I mean, as per versioning,
that's like a really good metaphor.
If you are a person that just needs another version
of their Google Doc, you wouldn't use Git.
Well, unless you use Git for everything else.
And same here, you don't need a huge combine
for using Flask.
And Flask usually, at least in my experience,
tries to build simpler APIs and you wouldn't use,
well, most companies that do API first don't use Flask.
They try to do Django DRF or FastAPI,
which is why this library seems
like a perfect choice for that.
- Yeah, yeah, indeed.
It seems really nice.
One of the things that, we were speaking of duplication,
one of the things that they just jump right into
to demonstrate here, and I imagine the FastAPI version one
as well could do it, but there's one endpoint
that doesn't change and there's one that is different.
So they copy the one that's different,
but for the one that doesn't change,
they just put a V1 and a V2 decorator on that one
and it remains unchanged basically, right?
- Mm-hmm, mm-hmm, yep.
But I mean,
Kadwin tries to escape this kind of verbosity
and essentially you have all endpoints everywhere
and if you wanna omit some endpoint
or change some endpoint or add some endpoint
into the new version, you just add a version change
and say, oh, this endpoint didn't exist
in the old version, that's it.
- Yeah, yeah, that's cool.
Very cool, yeah, because if you had 20 of these,
you'd have 20 decorators in a little function, right?
That's where it starts to get--
- That's what I'm saying, but I mean,
not a huge issue for Flask.
I haven't seen anyone building, I don't know,
50 or 200 endpoints apps with Flask.
I'm sure people do that, but I think it's the minority.
- Sure, all right, other side of the fence,
Django REST framework, DRF,
you already mentioned them a little bit.
And so Django, they already have like versioning
built into the framework itself, right?
- They have versioning interfaces built into.
So like, it's not, they're not implementing versioning
for you, but they give you all the tools
to implement your own versioning.
- Got it, yeah, okay, so they kind of have
the building blocks for it, excellent.
All right, well, I think we're pretty much out of time,
but thank you for being here,
this has been really interesting.
- Oh, it was for me as well.
Thank you for having me here.
- Yeah, you've given everyone a lot to think about.
You know, before we wrap it up, two quick things,
notable PyPI package, I mean, we've already given
Cadwin a shout out, anything else that like,
oh, I came across this and it was super cool,
maybe it deserves a little bit of a shout out,
anything that like you use a lot that you would recommend?
- So for us in our company, we started using
one more package of mine,
it's called ByteTest fixture classes.
- Okay.
- Essentially, when you are building groups of fixtures
that create some objects for you to use in your tests,
and then all of a sudden, one of your tests needs an object
that's a little different, you know, just a little bit,
and then everything just falls apart.
Well, a factory fixture pattern that you can see in ByteTest
allows you to, you know, make a function within a function
and one of them is a fixture and that's all cool and nice,
but then it's not typed.
Yeah, you can, you know, you can use, you know,
the callable syntax and then you're not going to have
the keyword arguments there and otherwise,
you can write a protocol and it's a lot of code.
What ByteTest fixture classes does
is it allows you to type everything there,
so you write the same amount of code, but it's all typed
and now you have, you can have groups of fixture classes
building on top of each other, which is a nice pattern
to have, but a really bad pattern to abuse.
- Very cool.
All right, well, nice, nice recommendation.
People can check that out.
Emil out in the audience already says,
amazing thing, I'm already using it.
So final call to action, people have APIs,
they've listened to us talk for an hour and they're like,
oh, we should be versioning our APIs.
We probably should be doing something here.
What do you recommend people do?
How do they get started?
How do they go further?
- So first you need to decide whether your use case
is simple, how many versions are you going to support?
If you're not planning to support more than two versions,
or if you are supporting versions only for your internal
microservices or only for your front end,
then consider using the simple tools,
consider using the FastAPI versioning,
you know, Flask, Raybar, things like that.
But then once you realize that you need to support versions
for months and you need three or more versions,
and you're providing your versions as a public,
you know, to the public,
then I advise moving straight into CAD/WIN
or CAD/WIN like frameworks.
If you use FastAPI, you can just use CAD/WIN.
It has a bit of a learning curve,
but within making one version,
you will realize just how simple it is.
And if you're not using CAD/WIN, that's fine as well.
I have all of the resources that I used to build it
and all of the resources, you know,
describing different ways of API versioning
there in the repository in the theory section.
So you can just read that.
And even if you don't like that approach,
we describe everything else there.
So you'll be able to pick the one you like.
But my personal recommendation,
don't pick the directories, they're painful.
- Awesome, really good advice, super cool project.
So thank you for being here Stanislav,
and talk to you later.
- Talk to you later.
[ monitoring background sound ]